# Management of Procedures 

Item    |   Details
----    |   ----
Purpose | Describing how procedures are written, reviewed, approved and withdrawn.
Departments | Cross-functional
Categories    | GDP

## References and Associated Documents

### References

* [Glossary][QEAIC]
* [Quality Risk Management][LBHIY]    
* [Change Control][UYNEF]
* [Training][ZWJPR]
* [Documentation Control][BWRPX]

### Associated Documents

None

## Roles

Role     |   Description    |   Who
------   |   --------       |  ----
Requestor|  Requests a new procedure or changes to a procedure | Anyone
Author   | Drafts the procedure or the changes to a procedure | Anyone
Reviewer | Reviews changes  | As identified by Requestor and Author
Business Approver  | Validates the changes from a business standpoint | Leadership of impacted function(s)
Quality Approver    | Approves changes from a quality standpoint | Quality
Responsible Person  | Grants final approval to all GDP documents | RP 

## Procedure

### Document Change Request

Upon identification of a requirement for a new procedure the Requestor creates a GitHub Issue with the "DOCUMENT CREATION REQUEST" label.

A new random code is generated by the system and added to the [Controlled Documents index](https://airtable.com/invite/l?inviteId=invqih3lbEsz9vN2f&inviteToken=8c9bfd29601b9fb26fae7d6772dab01b35d2490b2a971409e5b095236f3a709f).

The filename includes _GDP_ for all GDP related procedures in order to require validation by the @simplepharma/rp.

The author is identified using the discussion features of GitHub Issues.

### Sections

All procedures include the following sections:

* Purpose
* Department
* References and Associated Documents
* Roles
* Procedure
* Training

Where a particular section is not required, it must still be included with the words ”None”, ”Not Applicable”, ”NA".

### Nomenclature

Each procedure and document in the QMS has a unique, random, 5 letter document code, in addition to a meaningful title.

#### Department

The departments can be:

* Compliance
* Clinical
* Commercial
* Cross-functional
* Finance
* Information Technology
* Human Resources
* Legal
* Medical affairs
* Information
* Pharmacovigilance
* Quality
* Regulatory Affairs
* Supply Chain

Procedures identified as Cross-functional are those which are applicable to multiple business functions or where the responsibility/ownership is shared across two or more departments.

### Authoring

The author is identified via a discussion on the GitHub Issues platform. The author must be suitably knowledgeable of the target subject matter.

The author will collaborate with peers and subject matter experts before submitting the draft for approval.

Associated documents (forms) may be revised separately from the procedure revision process. The author revising the form will be responsible for assessing all corresponding documents as part of the change process.

### Review and Approval

Procedures and associated documents must be reviewed for use by at least one competent person in the area they relate to.

Procedures and associated documents must be approved for use by a senior competent person in the area to which the document relates. All procedures relating to GDP activities must be approved by a Responsible Person.

The approval procedure is performed using GitHub's 'pull request' feature. The pull request feature allows to move a document from a draft _branch_ into the master branch, which contains the final approved versions of the documentation.

The control mechanisms set up in GitHub enforce that all changes to the master are reviewed by at least one member of the quality team (@simplepharma/quality), and all documents that include _GDP_ in their name to be reviewed by a member of the RP team (@simplepharma/rp).

The reviewer is required to be different to the issuer of the pull request, except in the case that the issuer is a Responsible Person.

When the draft is reviewed and finalised, the author submits a pull request to integrate changes into the master, which are the final approved versions of the documentation.

The approval of pull requests is equivalent to a wet signature.

### Effective Date

Unless otherwise noted in the Purpose section, approved procedures are applicable immediately.

Training of the relevant employees should take place before the approval of the procedure.

### Training

The Author, in consultation with departmental management and subject matter experts, will agree the level of training required for users of each procedure.

### Periodic Review

All procedures relating to GxP must be reviewed at least every two years. The review process should begin at least three months before the relevant anniversary of the effective date to enable sufficient time to engage all stakeholders and gain approval of the revised procedure before the required anniversary.

### Withdrawal

When there is no longer a need for a document, a request for withdrawal is raised and discussed using GitHub Issues, with the Document Withdrawal Request label. 

Withdrawals must be communicated to those who used the document before withdrawal.

The Index of Controlled Documents must be updated to reflect the changed status of the document.

[SERIALIZATIO][AGDXV]

[GMP Guidelines]: https://ec.europa.eu/health/documents/eudralex/vol-4_en]
[GDP Guidelines]: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2013:343:0001:0014:EN:PDF
[GVP Guidelines]: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/regulatory-procedural-guideline/guideline-good-pharmacovigilance-practices-gvp-module-vi-collection-management-submission-reports_en.pdf
[Directive 2010/84/EU]: https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-1/dir_2010_84/dir_2010_84_en.pdf
[Regulation EU No 1235/2010]: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32010R1235
[AMXWS]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_AMXWS_Management_of_Standard_Operating_Procedures.md
[XIDEX]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_XIDEX_Responsible_Person.md
[BWRPX]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_BWRPX_Documentation_Control.md
[XCEUG]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_XCEUG_Deviations.md
[UYNEF]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_UYNEF_Change_Control.md
[OZCFN]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_OZCFN_Management_Review_And_Monitoring.md
[LBHIY]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_LBHIY_Quality_Risk_Management.md
[ZWJPR]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_ZWJPR_Training.md
[VQICE]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_VQICE_Receipt_Of_Medicinal_Products.md
[AGTXC]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_AGTXC_Establishing_The_Authority_Of_Suppliers_To_Supply_Medicinal_Products.md
[ZIWKI]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_ZIWKI_Customer_Complaints.md
[VOZWP]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_VOZWP_Recall_Procedure.md
[HBQIN]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_HBQIN_Outsourced_Activities.md
[GMQHI]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_GMQHI_Self_Inspections.md
[VTOMR]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_VTOMR_Falsified_Medicinal_Products.md
[BMAXZ]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_BMAXZ_Medicinal_Product_Returns.md
[YUISV]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_YUISV_CAPA.md
[QEAIC]: Document_QEAIC_Glossary.md
[GGNHM]: /procedures/Procedure_GDP_GGNHM_Reporting_of_Adverse_Events.md
[AGDXV]: {{ /procedures/Procedure_GDP_AGDXV_Serialisation.md | relative_url }}
